Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
Pranay P. Nagrania, Federico Municchib,c, Amy M. Marconneta and Ivan C. Christova,∗
aSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
bFaculty of Engineering, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham NG7 2RD, UK
cSchool of Mathematical Sciences, University of Nottingham, University Park, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Two-ﬂuid model
Interphase heat transfer
Concentrated suspension
Shear-induced migration
Thermo-rheological ﬂux
ABSTRACT
We develop a two-ﬂuid model (TFM) for heat transfer in dense non-Brownian suspensions.
Speciﬁcally, we propose closure relations for the inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcient and the
thermal diﬀusivity of the particle phase based on calibration against experimental data. The
model is then employed to simulate non-isothermal ﬂow in an annular Couette cell. We ﬁnd
that, when the shear rate is controlled by the rotation of the inner cylinder, both the shear and
thermal gradients are responsible for particle migration. Within the TFM framework, we iden-
tifytheoriginandfunctionalformofa“thermo-rheological”migrationforcethatrationalizesour
observations. Furthermore, we apply our model to ﬂow in eccentric Couette cells. Our simula-
tionsrevealthatthesystem’sheattransfercoeﬃcientisaﬀectedbyboththeclassicshear-induced
migration of particles and the newly identiﬁed thermo-rheological migration eﬀect.
1. Introduction
Particles in sheared suspension ﬂows tend to migrate from regions of large shear rate to regions of small shear
rate. This phenomenon known as particle migration can aﬀect mixing and heat transfer [22]. Understanding particle
migration is important for a broad range of applications including geothermal energy recovery [61, 62], hydraulic
fracturing[4,17],hemodynamics[51],microﬂuidics[14,16],electronicscooling[7,9],andfoodprocessing[26,29].
These applications have driven signiﬁcant research on the topic of ﬂuidized particles and particulate suspensions.
However,thermaltransportinsuch“complexﬂuids”appearstobelesswellunderstood,especiallyinthecaseofdense
suspensions. Oftenapproximatemodelswithlimitedgeneralityandlimitedvalidationareappliedtoestimateeﬀective
material properties of a particle-ﬂuid mixture. To ﬁll this gap in the literature, we develop a continuum two-ﬂuid
model (TFM) for computational analysis of the interaction between heat transfer and particle migration in the ﬂow
of dense suspensions. Speciﬁcally, by extending the dense-suspension TFM from [41] to incorporate coupled heat
transfer within each andbetween the phases, we wish to provide a general and extensible computational framework
withwhichonecanpredictivelysimulate(uponpropercalibrationperformedherein)theinteractionbetweenshear-rate
gradients and thermal gradients in dense suspensions, across a variety of ﬂow scenarios.
Afterbrieﬂyintroducingthebackgroundandstate-of-the-artofdensesuspensionmodelinginSection2,wediscuss
thegoverningequationspertainingtotheTFMformodelingﬂowsofdensenon-Browniansuspensions,includingtheir
rheologyinSection3.1andtheirthermophysicalpropertiesinSection3.2. Wedescribetheheattransferclosurerelation
that we propose to capture coupled thermal-particle migration phenomena via the TFM. In Section 3.3, we provide a
conceptual argument, based on the temperature-dependent ﬂuid properties of how shear and thermal gradients couple
and yield migration forces on the particulate phase. Then, in Section 3.4, we summarize the numerical methods used
to implement the TFM in OpenFOAM®, along with the schemes used, and the criteria employed to obtain accurate
results. We calibrate our computational model against the heat pulse experiments of Metzger et al. [32] in Section 4.1
toobtaintheﬁttingparametersintheinter-phaseheattransferclosure. Then,inSection4.2,we(qualitatively)validate
theﬂowsolver(noﬁttingparametersinthisisothermalcase)againstdatafromSubiaetal.[57]foraneccentricCouette
cell. Next,tounderstandtheinterplaybetweenthermalandsheargradients,westudyparticlemigrationsubjecttotwo
thermalboundaryconditions(BCs)inaCouettecell(Section5.1)—oneBCinwhichthethermalandsheargradients
are in the same direction, and another BC in which they are in opposite directions. We also extend the discussion
to eccentric Couette cells (Section 5.2) and show that the geometric eccentricity can be used to tune the thermal
∗Corresponding author
christov@purdue.edu (I. C. Christov)
ORCID(s): 0000-0003-4568-9318 (P. P. Nagrani);0000-0002-5105-6173 (F. Municchi);0000-0001-7506-2888 (A. M. Marconnet);
0000-0001-8531-0531 (I. C. Christov)
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 1 of 20
arXiv:2105.08853v2  [physics.flu-dyn]  4 Nov 2021

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
performance of the suspension ﬂow. Finally, in Section 6, we summarize our ﬁndings and brieﬂy discuss potential
avenues for future work.
2. Background and problem statement
2.1. Shear-induced particle migration in ﬂows of dense suspensions
The migration of particles from regions of high shear rate to regions of low shear occurs at low particle Reynolds
number(i.e.,theregimeofnegligibleparticleinertia)andlargeparticlePeclétnumber( i.e.,thenon-Brownianregime)
[37, p. 2]. Historical overviews of this phenomenon can be found elsewhere [13, 37]. A standard setup for experi-
mentally characterizing suspension ﬂows is the Couette cell (i.e., the gap between two, usually concentric, rotating
cylinders). Past experimental studies sought to explain, with varying levels of ﬁdelity, the irreversible particle migra-
tion phenomenon [31, 49], including its dependence on the shear rate, the particle volume fraction, and the particle
size.
The simplest model of shear-induced particle migration is a phenomenological transport process, in which scalar
diﬀusive ﬂuxes (in principle, dependent on the gradients of shear rate and particle concentration) are posited [27, 48,
63]. Themodelresultingfromthisapproachistermedthe diﬀusiveﬂuxmodel (DFM).TheDFMisphenomenological
and requires empirical calibration of (i) a collision ﬂux (i.e., migration of particles to a region of low collisional
frequency between particles [27]) and (ii) a viscosity ﬂux (i.e., migration caused caused by viscosity gradients [27]).
The simplicity of the DFM is appealing, and it yields itself to straightforward computational studies. However, as
DennandMorris[13,p.212]note,theDFM“givesresultsthatconﬂictwithseveralexperimentsinothersimple-shear
geometries” beyond the Couette cell.
In order to obtain deeper insight into particle migration, thesuspension balance model(SBM) was introduced by
Nott and Brady [44] and further reﬁned in recent years [28, 45]. Rather than treating particle migration simply as an
extra diﬀusive ﬂux in the particle transport equation, the SBM (in its most common implementation [22]) involves
solving the suspension’s momentum equation, a particle transport equation, and an energy conservation equation for
the suspension. For a pressure-driven ﬂow, Nott and Brady [44] used both particle-resolved Stokesian dynamics sim-
ulations and the SBM to explain how particles, starting with a uniform particle volume fraction, migrate to the center
of the channel (where the shear rate is low) in inhomogeneous ﬂow due to a force arising from the “average particle
pressure.”
In general, normal stresses arise in ﬂows in curvilinear geometries, and they must be accounted for to understand
particle migration. To this end, Morris and Boulay [38] reformulated the SBM [44] to capture the anisotropy of the
normal stresses. Their results were further conﬁrmed by the more recent experiments by Dbouk et al. [12]. Conse-
quently,modelingofshear-inducedparticlemigrationinﬂowsbeyondthecanonicalunidirectionalconﬁguration(such
as contraction-expansions and cavity ﬂows [34], as well as ﬂows in concentric [11] and eccentric [36] Couette cells)
became possible. These SBM formulation [11, 38] highlight that the divergence of the particle stress tensor, which
arises from the stress inhomogeneity, is the driving force for particle migration.
In contrast to the traditional implementation of the SBM, which lumps the ﬂuid and particles into a single phase,
two-ﬂuidmodels (TFMs)[18]solvethegoverning(massandmomentumconservation)equationsfortheparticlephase
andfortheﬂuidphaseseparately. ATFM,therefore,doesnotmaketheequilibriumassumptionbetweenthetwophases,
whichleadstothetraditionalformoftheSBM.Thus,itisexpectedthataTFMcanbeappliedtoawiderclassofﬂows.
Buyevich[5]usedthisapproachtoaddressthecoupledeﬀectofBrownianandshear-inducedmigrationinconcentrated
suspensions. Morerecently,TFMshavebeenappliedtosimulateproppanttransportinhydraulicfracturingapplications
[17, 53] due to their ability to capture the governing physics in diﬀerent ﬂow regimes. Meanwhile, Municchi et al.
[41] implemented and benchmarked a TFM for the numerical simulation of dense suspension ﬂows (including shear-
induced migration) in OpenFOAM®. They showed good agreement with the previous works on particle migration,
suggesting general curvilinear ﬂows of dense particulate suspensions can be accurately simulated with a TFM using
the proper rheological closures that account for particle stress anisotropy. Here, we build upon this approach.
2.2. Heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
While particle migration has been studied extensively from a ﬂuid mechanics perspective, the eﬀect of thermal
gradientsandheattransferonparticlemigrationhasnotreceivedasmuchattention. Yet,whensuspensionsaresheared,
experiments have demonstrated that the eﬀective suspension thermal conductivity is enhanced [1, 2, 43, 52, 55]. In
additiontotheshearrate,thethermalconductivityofsuspensionsalsodependsonotherpropertiessuchastheparticle
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 2 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
volume fraction, the particle size, and the particles’ thermal diﬀusivity [1, 2, 52]. Recent research (e.g., [8, 32, 62])
has focused on modeling this enhancement of thermal transport using eﬀective properties. Our goal is to increase the
modeling ﬁdelity by using a TFM.
EarlyworkbySohnandChen[55]demonstratedthatshearingsuspensionsinducesparticlemotioninthemixture,
which leads to convection that enhances thermal transport. Shin and Lee [52] showed that the suspension’s homog-
enized thermal conductivity increases with the shear rate, though their experiments appear to be in an inertial ﬂow
regime. Morerecently,Metzgeretal.[32]performedaheat-pulseexperiment,inwhichtheyheatedtheinnercylinder
of a Couette cell until steady state was achieved, and then let it cool while observing the temperature decay with and
withoutshearingofthesuspensioninthegap(viarotationofonecylinderofthecell). Afastertemperaturedecaywas
observed when the suspension was sheared, suggesting a shear-induced improvement of thermal transport. Metzger
etal.[32]developedaclosurerelationfortheeﬀective(homogenized)thermaldiﬀusivityofthesuspensionasafunc-
tion of particle volume fraction and the thermal Péclet numberPeth, by drawing upon functional forms motivated
in earlier work on shear-enhanced diﬀusion [60, 64].
Alimitednumberofcomputationalstudieshaveaddressedtheinterplaybetweenshear-andthermal-drivenparticle
migration in suspensions. Most recently, Wu et al. [63] and Dbouk [8] modiﬁed the DFM and SBM, respectively, to
accountforthermaltransportindensesuspensionﬂows. Wuetal.[63]thenemployedtheirDFMtoshowadiscernible
eﬀect of a temperature gradient across a Couette cell’s gap (both concentric and eccentric) on the radial particle dis-
tribution proﬁle. In a similar vein, Kang et al. [24] performed a computational DFM study of the onset of thermal
convection in suspensions. Dbouk [8], on the other hand, incorporated a conjugate heat transfer model and the clo-
sure relation of Metzger et al. [32] into the SBM. He quantiﬁed the enhancement of thermal performance due to a
suspension, compared to a clear liquid, for forced convection through a rectangular channel. On this basis, Dbouk [9]
suggested exploiting particle migration eﬀects to improve heat transfer in applications related to CPU cooling. Re-
cently, this model has been applied to buoyancy-driven ﬂows in immersed granular beds [10]. In our work, gravity
plays a minor role since we focus on shear-driven ﬂows.
Whiletheserecentworksbegintodemonstratetheimportanceofthecoupledparticlemigrationandthermaltrans-
port, DFMs and the typical form of the SBM do not capture the inter-phase heat transfer between the particle phase
and the ﬂuid phase, since they employ a single thermal transport equation, based on eﬀective properties, for the mix-
ture. Speciﬁcally,thepriorcomputationalmodelsarebasedontheassumptionofthermalequilibriumbetweenthetwo
phases, which we relax in the present work.
3. Governing equations of the TFM
3.1. Flow and rheology
In this subsection, we summarize the basic equations of the TFM for dense particulate suspensions, as detailed in
[41] and [59]. Introducing the particle volume fraction ﬁeld(x,t), wherex is the position vector in 3D space andt
is time, we write the governing equations for the two phases (‘p’ for particle and ‘f’ for ﬂuid) as:
)
)t
 p+( ⋅ pup=0, (1)
)
)t
f(1− )
+( ⋅fuf(1− )
=0, (2)
)
)t
 pup
+( ⋅ pup⊗up
=( ⋅p+pg+fd, (3)
)
)t
f(1− )uf
+( ⋅f(1− )uf ⊗uf
=− ( ⋅ pI−f
−fd+(1− )fg. (4)
Equations(1)and(2)aretheconservationofmass(continuity)equationsforthetwophases,whileEqs.(3)and(4)are
the corresponding conservation of linear momentum equations.
Here, the particle-phase stress tensorp is to be modeled,f is the deviatoric stress tensor of the generalized
Newtonian ﬂuid phase, and
fd =Kd
 up−uf
+( ⋅ f −pI−(1− )(pp (5)
is theinter-phase force, whereKd is theso-called Clift drag coeﬃcient[15]. Furthermore,p=pf+pp is the‘shared’
pressure, whichsatisﬁesthePoissonequationinthecaseofanincompressiblesuspension. Importantly, asin[41], we
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 3 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
incorporate the state-of-the art rheological models for dense suspensions via
p=2p ̇Sp+p
 ( ⋅up
I+s, (6)
wherep andp are the shear and bulk viscosities obtained using the kinetic theory of granular ﬂows [21] and the
general expression for the frictional viscosity described in [40]. For either phase (‘p’ or ‘f’), ̇S = 1
2[(u+((u)T]−
(( ⋅u)I is the deviatoric rate of strain.
The particulate phase’s frictional viscosityp is expressed, as in [40, 41], as the product of the ﬂuid viscosity and
a function of the particle volume fraction(). Speciﬁcally, it takes the form:
p=f(Tf)() ,  ()= a+b
0
1− 
m
1−1
+c
0
1− 
m
1−2
, (7)
wherem is the maximum packing fraction (here, taken to be0.68 corresponding to BBC sphere packing), whilea,
b, andc are parameters ﬁtted from data in the literature. We recall from [40, 41] that Eq. (7) returns the closures
from [38] and [30], under appropriate choices of the model parameters.
The extra contributions in Eq. (6) is the anisotropic stress, due to the shearing of the particle phase, given by
s=−fN()̇effQ, ̇ eff =  2̇Sp∶ ̇Sp
1∕2+ ̇NL, (8)
where N is the normal scaled viscosity. The nonlocal shear ratėNL regularizes the model by accounting for the
average stress at the (sub-continuum) particle scale [33]. Speciﬁcally,̇NL ensures thaṫeff ≠ 0, for example, at the
centerline of a channel [41], as a way to overcome the breakdown of the continuum assumption at the particle scale
[35, 38, 44].
In Eq. (8), the extra stress’ anisotropy is represented by means of the tensorQ [38]. This anisotropy tensor can
be diagonalized by employing a suitable local orthonormal coordinate system based on the particle phase velocity
ﬁeld:Q= ∑3
i=1i()ei⊗ei, wherei()are theanisotropy weight functions [38], andei are theunit vectors in the
direction of the ﬂow (i= 1), gradient (i= 2) and vorticity (i= 3), given bye1 =up
ðupð,e3 = ((×up)ð(×upð,
ande2 = e1×e3. In DFMs and SBMs, it is not possible to capture the dense suspension’s stress anisotropy in this
way because of the assumptions made on Eq. (3) do not allow forup to be resolved. The above deﬁnition of the unit
vectors, introduced in [41], allows for the straightforward generalization of the model to 3D curvilinear ﬂows.
3.2. Heat transfer and energy equations
To succinctly describe how we incorporate heat transfer within the TFM, it is most convenient to express each
phase’s energy equation using a mixed formulation with their enthalpies, internal energies, and temperatures:
unsteady
©­­­­®­­­­ª
)
)t
 pHp
 +
convection
©­­­­­­­®­­­­­­­ª
( ⋅ pHpup
 =
pressure work
©®ª
)p
)t +
conduction
©­­­­­­­®­­­­­­­ª
( ⋅ pp(ep
 −
inter-phase heat transfer
©­­­­­®­­­­­ª
Kℎ(Tp−Tf), (9)
)
)t
f(1− )Hf
+( ⋅f(1− )Hfuf
=(1− ))p
)t +( ⋅ff(1− )(ef
+Kℎ(Tp−Tf), (10)
wherethestagnation(or“total”)enthalpies Hp,f = hp,f+1
2ðup,fð2 havebeenintroducedforconveniencefromthespe-
ciﬁcenthalpies hp,f ofthephases. Notethattheinternalenergyofeachphaseis ep,f = hp,f−p∕f,p. Inequations(9)
and (10),Kℎ is the (volumetric,Wm−3K−1) inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcient to be modeled;f = kf∕(fCp,f)
andp=kp∕(pCp,p)arethephases’thermaldiﬀusivities,with kp,kf andCp,p,Cp,f beingtheirthermalconductivities
and speciﬁc heats, respectively;Tp andTf are the phases’ individual temperature ﬁelds. In Eqs. (9) and (10), we have
neglected viscous dissipation (unlike previous work [8]). This assumption will be justiﬁed upon specifying the ﬂow
conditions in Section 5 below. Also, there are no volumetric sources of heat present or work done by gravitational
forces. Work done by buoyancy is not considered in the energy equation in present work, as buoyancy was found to
have marginal eﬀects in ﬂows similar to those studied herein [8].
To create a predictive TFM for heat transfer in dense suspensions, we must ensure thatKℎ takes into account the
non-uniform shear-induced migration within the particle phase, as well as the particle phase’s thermal conductivity
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 4 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
relative to the suspending ﬂuid. In the ﬂuidized beds literature [23, 25], heat transfer is incorporated into TFMs via
a Nusselt correlation:e.g., the Ranz–Marshall [50] formulaNudp = 2+0.6Re1∕2
dp
Pr1∕3, whereRedp = Ufdp∕f
andPr =f∕f, then,Kℎ,0 =Nudpkf∕d2
p. Based on this approach, we propose a shear-dependent inter-phase heat
transfer coeﬃcient
Kℎ(, ̇)= Kℎ,0[1+ (‖̇Sp‖d2
p∕p
«­­­­¯­­­­¬
∼Peth
)m], (11)
where andm are parameters that must be calibrated against experiments (in Section 4.1 below for the heat-pulse
experiment from [32]),̇=
√
2‖̇Sp‖, andPeth is a particle-based thermal Péclet number for the sheared suspension.
Althoughourexpressionfor Kℎ(, ̇)issimilar(infunctionalform)tothemixturemodels’ eff(̇)[8,32], Kℎ and
eff represent fundamentally diﬀerent physics (see also [6]). In the TFM, the usualp andf take care of conduction
within each phase, thus they cannot depend oṅ. Importantly, by writing down separate energy equations for the
phases, we shed the assumption of “microscopic local thermal equilibrium between the solid and ﬂuid phases” [8,
p. 437] used in the SBM.
3.3. The origin of thermo-rheological ﬂuxes
AsweshowinSection5, thepresenceoftemperaturegradientsinaﬂowresultsinanetﬂuxofparticleswhich, in
most ﬂuids, is oriented in the direction opposite to the heat ﬂux. This phenomenon results from the interplay between
the thermal state of the ﬂuid phase and the rheology of the suspended particulate phase. In particular, the dynamic
viscosity f of liquids is generally a decreasing function of temperature [46, p. 117], so thatf = f
 Tf
 and
df∕dTf <0.
Now, consider the forcefΣ =( ⋅p acting on the particulate phase due to the changes in particle stress. Using
the chain rule, it is also possible to splitfΣ as
fΣ= f( ⋅p
«­¯­¬
shear-induced
migration and diﬀusion
−
thermo-rheological
©­­­­­®­­­­­ª
p ⋅ (Tf
, (12)
where we deﬁned the scaled particle stress tensorp =p∕f and the thermal variation coeﬃcient of the dynamic
viscosity:
 =
óóóóó
d lnf

dTf
óóóóó
. (13)
The second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (12) represents the thermo-rheological force that couples the energy
equation with the momentum equation. Speciﬁcally, Eq. (12) shows that there is an additional force oriented in the
directionoppositetotheprojectionoftheparticlestressonthetemperaturegradient. Hence,ifweconsiderthecasein
whichtheparticlesarepushedinthepositive x-directionbytheshear-inducedmigrationforces,atemperaturegradient
aligned with the shear rate gradient will result in an opposing ﬂux. It is also clear that no ﬂux can arise solely due
to the temperature gradient, but the presence of a shear ﬂow is also required. However, while shear-induced particle
migration is driven by the spatial variation of the shear-rate, the thermo-rheological ﬂux should also be observable in
uniformly sheared suspensions.
Now, disregarding the terms arising from kinetic theory (which do not play a signiﬁcant role in the present study
due to the low value of the granular temperature and the assumption of a non-Brownian suspension), we can express
fΣ, via Eq. (6), as:
fΣ=( ⋅2f(Tf)()̇Sp−f(Tf)N()̇effQ. (14)
Tobetterillustratethepoint,consideraunidirectionalﬂowscenarioasdepictedschematicallyinFig.1. Inthissituation,
theforceisactinginthe x-direction,normaltotheshear,andthesuspensionissubjecttoatemperaturegradientalong
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 5 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
uy(x)
˙γ(x)
x
Figure 1: Diagram of a unidirectional shear conﬁguration, which is representative of Couette ﬂow between two cylinders.
The continuous line represents the velocity in they-direction and the dashed line represents the shear rate.
x. We denote the shear rate aṡ s(x) = ̇Sp,yx = (1∕2))up,y∕)x. Furthermore, we takėeff = ̇=
√
2ð̇ sð = −
√
2̇ sas
in this case the velocity is always decreasing in thex-direction. This conﬁguration is illustrative of the velocity and
shear proﬁles expected in Couette cells. Under these conditions, after some algebra, Eq. (14) becomes:
fΣ,x=A()
H
f
)̇
)x − ̇
óóóóó
df
dTf
óóóóó
)Tf
)x
I
+f ̇dA()
d
)
)x , A ()=−
√
2−N1. (15)
It is now clear that an additional ﬂux (second term in the parentheses above) opposing the classical migration ﬂux
(ﬁrstterm)isinducedbythegradientoftheshearrate. Equation(15)alsoshowsthelineardependenceofthethermo-
rheologicalforceontheshearrate. Noticethat,since A()isalwaysnegative,thethermo-rheologicalforceisoriented
in the same direction as the temperature gradient.
In the absence of other forces perpendicular to the ﬂow direction (such as gravity or pressure gradients), the force
balance on the particle phase isfΣ,x = 0. Hence, in order to achieve a perfectly mixed suspension without particle
segregation (i.e.,)∕)x = 0) the following relation between shear rate and temperature gradient should hold:
)ln ̇
)x =−
)Tf
)x . (16)
Under the assumption that is not varying signiﬁcantly, Eq. (16) can be easily integrated for a domain bounded
between two wallsx=w1 andx=w2, leading to:
ln
H
̇ðw1
̇ðw2
I
=−

Tfðw1−Tfðw2

. (17)
Equation (17) shows that, if the shear rate is uniform (̇ðw1 = ̇ðw2), then only an isothermal suspension can also be
homogeneous. We also remark that the integration of the logarithm can be carried out only iḟ ≠ 0 throughout the
domain. This observation also has a physical signiﬁcance since no thermo-rheological ﬂux can exist wherė= 0,
whileclassicalmigrationﬂuxesmightstillbepresent,astheydependonthegradientof ̇. Hence,asuspensioncannot
be homogeneous under such circumstances; the classical migration ﬂux would remain unbalanced at such points. It
is worth noting that such regions (or isolated) points wherė= 0are pathological also in standard shear-induced
migration,andanon-localnon-zeroeﬀectiveshearratehastobeusedinstead(recallthediscussionfollowingEq.(8)).
Finally,inthemoregeneralcaseinwhichvariationsof  arenotnegligible(forexampleduetolargetemperature
gradients), it is more convenient to integrate the right-hand-side of Eq. (16) with respect tof rather thanTf, leading
to:
̇ðw1
̇ðw2
=
f(Tfðw1)
f(Tfðw2). (18)
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 6 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
While Eq. (18) is a more complete expression, it possesses the same characteristics as Eq. (17). However, though
conceptually enlightening, both expressions are generally of little practical use as the value of the shear at the walls
due to dense suspension ﬂow is generally unknowna priori(as there is no analytical solution).
3.4. Simulation methodology
The governing equations [Eqs. (1), (2), (3), (4), (9), and (10)] are solved numerically via theﬁnite-volume method
(FVM) [39] in a solver implemented in OpenFOAM® v7. The full description of the numerical approach (based on
the earlier algorithm of Passalacqua and Fox [47]) can be found in [41]. The FVM discretization ensures that mass
is conserved “automatically” in all the cell elements that the ﬂow geometry is divided into. A structured mesh was
employed for computational modeling of coupled thermal-particle migration in the 2D Couette cell (Fig. 2). A grid
independence study was performed (summarized in Appendix C) to determine the optimal number of mesh elements
neededtoobtainaccurateresults,whilesimultaneouslyensuringreasonablewall-clocktimerequiredtocompleteeach
simulation.
Forthediscretizationofthetransientterms,asecond-orderbackwardschemewasemployed. Althoughthisscheme,
on an orthogonal mesh, is unconditionally stable, this is rarely the case in reality. Deferred correction for high-order
schemes, coupling, and nonlinear terms cannot be handled implicitly, introducing a Courant–Friedrichs–Lewy (CFL)
numberCo constraint [39], which we enforce to ensure convergence of the simulations. Diﬀusion terms were dis-
cretized using the “Gauss” approach in OpenFOAM®. A second-order linear discretization scheme was employed
to obtain higher accuracy for the discretization of diﬀusion terms. Furthermore, to account for the eﬀect of non-
orthogonality of the mesh employed on the discretization of the diﬀusion terms, a “corrected" method was used [39].
The linear interpolation scheme from OpenFOAM® was chosen to interpolate the diﬀusion coeﬃcients from the cell
faces to the cell centers. The divergence terms were discretized using the “Gauss” method of OpenFOAM®, and an
upwind scheme was employed on the convective terms in the equations. The “cellMDLimited Gauss linear" scheme
wasusedfordiscretizationofthegradientterms. Thegradientschemeensuresboundednessofthegradienttermsafter
discretization. In the simulations below, the pressure and velocity residual convergence criteria were set to10−7 and
10−9, respectively.
The“PIMPLE”method,whichisacombinationofthe pressure-implicitwithsplittingofoperators (PISO)method
and thesemi-implicit method for pressure-linked equations(SIMPLE) [39] was used to couple the Navier–Stokes
and energy equations and obtain converged residuals for the transient simulations. The minimum number of linear
solver iteration was always set to 1, so that convergence of simulations was achieved due to convergence of residuals.
Moreover, the number of times the entire system of equations was solved was determined by observing the number of
iterationsrequiredfortheresidualstoconvergeduringeachtimestep. Adynamicadjustabletimestepwasusedinthe
simulations, which ensured thatmaxCo< 0.5 during the entire simulations.
4. Calibration and validation of the TFM
4.1. Heat transfer through a sheared suspension in a concentric Couette cell
Metzger et al. [32] evaluated heat transfer in a sheared suspension of poly-methyl methacrylate (PMMA) particles
dispersed within a Newtonian ﬂuid (mixture of Triton X-100, zinc chloride solution and water) in a Couette cell ge-
ometry (top view shown in Fig. 2). The particles and ﬂuid had identical thermophysical properties in order to isolate
the eﬀect of shear-induced migration on the heat transfer enhancement. We calibrate the parameters in our TFM via
their experimental data.
To simulate the shearing of the suspension in a concentric Couette cell with inner and outer radii ofRin = 5cm
andRout =6.2cm, respectively, we usea structured mesh(shown inFig. 2). Theinner cylinder rotatesat agiven rate
ofΩin, while the outer cylinder is held stationary (Ωout = 0). For convenience, we book-keep the applied shear rate
at steady state via the relatioṅ= (2ΩinR2
out)∕(R2
out−R2
in) at the inner wall, which admittedly only holds true for a
clear Newtonian ﬂuid ﬂow. In what follows, this quantity is reported, and the value oḟis set by varyingΩin. The
ﬂuidandparticlethermophysicalpropertiesusedarelistedinTable1. Consistentwiththeexperimentsof[32],weuse
a neutrally buoyant suspension (p = f) with an initial, uniform bulk particle volume fraction of(x,t = 0) =b
everywhere across the gap. We do not consider the eﬀect of temperature varying thermophysical properties as the
maximum temperature diﬀerence in the system is only5K in this case.
Intheheat-pulseexperiment[32],theentiresystemwasinitiallyatauniformtemperatureof Tinitial =293K . Then,
the inner cylinder was heated toTin=298K for a duration of5s , while the outer cylinder was kept atTout =293K .
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 7 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
Figure 2: Geometry and structured computational mesh of the annular Couette cell’s ﬂow domain.
Property Particle (‘p’) Fluid (‘f’)
Density (kgm−3) 1180 1180
Dynamic viscosity (Pas) – 3.0
Thermal conductivityk (Wm−1K−1) 0.19 0.19
Speciﬁc heatCp (Jkg−1K−1) 1260 1260
Table 1
Particle and ﬂuid properties used for the calibration of the TFM against the experimental results of Metzger et al. [32].
After that, the heater was turned oﬀ, and the temperature of inner cylinder decayed back to293K . This heating and
cooling process was performed for both the unsheared and sheared (varying inner cylinder rotation rate) suspensions.
For our calibration, we use the case oḟ= 10s−1. Next, we describe how the heat-pulse experiment was simulated
using the TFM to calibrate our proposed model.
The BCs are speciﬁed in Table 2. The outer cylinder was approximated as insulated and always held stationary.
During the 5s of heating, the inner cylinder was held stationary and the wall temperature was ﬁxed at298K in our
model; again, this neglects the heating time for the cylinder to reach the set temperature, but agrees with previous
modeling work [8]. During the cooling process, we approximated the BC at the inner cylinder as adiabatic, which
neglects the energy storage term in the inner cylinder as it cools. Because the heat transfer depends on shearing
and the parameters may vary with time, which cannot be established for the published experimental description, we
insteadapplyanadiabaticBCduringcoolingfortheinnercylinder(similartotheapproachin[8]). Thus,theonlyfree
parameters in this problem are andmin the shear-dependent inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcientKℎ from Eq. (11).
By comparing our model’s prediction to the experimental data from [32], as shown in Fig. 3, we calibrated the
parameters, yielding = 0.2 andm = 1(see Appendix A). Note that these parameters are not the same as found by
Metzger et al. [32], who determined = 0.046 in their expression for the shear-dependent eﬀective diﬀusivity. Of
course,sincetheTFMcapturesdiﬀerentphysics(recallthediscussioninSection3.2),itisnotexpectedthattheﬁtting
parameter values would be the same. Note thatm= 1indicates that inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcientKℎ depends
linearly on the particle-based thermal Péclet numberPeth (recall Eq. (11)), which is generally expected [64].
4.2. Flow of a sheared suspension in an eccentric Couette cell
An eccentric Couette cell is another typical geometry in which ﬂows of dense suspensions are studied. In this
geometry, the center of the inner cylinder is oﬀset from the center of the outer cylinder. The eccentricity is quantiﬁed
bytheratio E=d∕(Rout−Rin),where disthedistancebetweenthecentersofthetwocylinders. Ingeneral,eccentricity
canleadtoarecirculatingregion[3]thatinducesadditionalmixing[58]. Subiaetal.[57]performedexperimentsand
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 8 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0 1 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 0 1 0 0
100
Metzger  et al. (2013) experiment (0 s-1)
Present Study (0 s-1)
Metzger  et al. (2013) experiment (10 s-1)
Present Study (10 s-1)
Figure 3: Unsteady temperature responseTsusðr=Rin at the inner cylinder (r=Rin) for the heat-pulse experiment, starting
from a uniform temperatureTinitial =293 K. This plot shows the successful calibration the TFM to the experimental data
of Metzger et al. [32]. The calibration against thė=10s −1 experimental data yields=0.2 andm=1 (see Appendix A).
The case oḟ=0 s−1 is provided for completeness only and discussed in Appendix B.
Location BC t< 5 s(heating) t> 5 s(cooling)
Inner cylinder Thermal Tin=298 K Adiabatic
Shear rate ̇=0 s−1 ̇=10 s−1
Outer cylinder Thermal Adiabatic Adiabatic
Shear rate ̇=0 s−1 ̇=0 s−1
Table 2
Boundary conditions for the TFM simulations of the Couette cell heat-pulse experiment. The adiabatic condition enforces
(Tf ⋅n = (Tp ⋅n = 0 on the appropriate boundaries with unit normaln. The speciﬁed shear rate is estimated as
̇=(2Ω inR2
out)∕(R2
out−R2
in) and achieved by setting a suitable rotation rate of the inner wallΩin.
ﬁnite element modeling of suspension ﬂow using the parameters listed in Table 3. Next, we qualitatively validate our
TFM against the numerical model and experiments of Subia et al. [57] by plotting contours in Fig. 4 after diﬀerent
number of revolutions (turns) of the inner cylinder. Our TFM results are in good agreement with the previous ones.
Note that this validation is for the isothermal case. In Section 5.2, we explore heat transfer in the eccentric Couette
cell.
5. Particle migration in the presence of coupled thermal and shear gradients
In this section, we discuss our main computational results on the interaction of shear-induced migration with
thermal gradients across the system. Speciﬁcally, we will consider the two cases in which the temperature diﬀerence
ΔT =Tin−Tout across the gap is either positive or negative (i.e., heat transfer occurs from the inner to the out wall,
orvice versa).
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 9 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
Quantity Rin Rout E Ωin dp f b f
Value 0.64 cm 2.54 cm 0.5 90 rpm 675 µm 4.95 Pas 0.5 1180 kgm−3
Table 3
Geometric parameters, particle and ﬂuid properties used in the simulations that validate our TFM against the results of
Subia et al. [57]. The suspension is comprised of PMMA particles suspended in a Newtonian ﬂuid.
Turns,𝑁
Subiaet al. (1998) Present study
NumericalExperimental Numerical
𝑁=40
𝑁=1000
𝑁=2000
𝑁=3000
𝑁=5000
Figure 4: Qualitative validation of the TFM simulation against the results of Subia et al. [57] for dense suspension ﬂow
(see Table 3 for the parameters) in an eccentric Couette cell. Color shows contours of the particle volume fraction
for diﬀerent number of turnsN of the inner cylinder. The ﬁrst and second columns are reproduced, with permission,
from [Subia, S.R., Ingber, M.S., Mondy, L.A., Altobelli, S.A., Graham, A.L., 1998. Modelling of concentrated suspensions
using a continuum constitutive equation. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 373, 193–219. doi:10.1017/S0022112098002651©
Cambridge University Press.]
5.1. Concentric Couette cell
After calibrating the inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcient as described in Section 4.1, we performed a parametric
study to understand the interplay between shear and thermal gradients on particle migration. Speciﬁcally, we varied
the bulk particle volume fractionb, the thermal Péclet numberPeth = ̇d2
p∕p and the temperature diﬀerenceΔT
acrossgap. AsinthecalibrationdescribedinSection4.1,weusetheconcentricCouettecellgeometryshowninFig.2.
Keeping in mind the salient application of suspension ﬂows to electronics cooling [9], in these simulations we
consider boron nitride (BN) particles dispersed in a ﬂuoro-carbon (FC) ﬂuid. This choice of suspension is to ensure
thattheparticlesandﬂuidhavenearlyidenticaldensities,andhence,thesuspensionisneutrallybuoyant. Theparticles
have constant thermophysical properties as given in Table 4. The thermophysical properties of the FC-43 ﬂuid are
temperature dependent [19]. We ﬁt a fourth-order polynomial to the data for the FC-43 ﬂuid viscosity as a function
of temperature from [19], as given in Table 4. The choice of such particles and ﬂuid is due to large contrast in their
thermal conductivities, which we hypothesize will allow us to observe signiﬁcant thermal performance enhancement.
The thermophysical properties of the particles are taken to be constant because measurements of the temperature-
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 10 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
Property Particle (‘p’) Fluid (‘f’)
Density (kgm−3) 1900 2508−2 .18Tf
Dynamic viscosity (Pas) – 0.3933−0 .0035Tf +(1.13×10 −5)T2
f
−(1.5×10 −8)T3
f +(6.7×10 −12)T4
f
Thermal conductivityk (Wm−1K−1) 35.5 0.08611−(7×10 −5)Tf
Speciﬁc heatCp (Jkg−1K−1) 960 589.8+1 .554Tf
Table 4
Thermophysical properties of the suspension of boron nitride (BN) particles into a ﬂuoro-carbon (FC) ﬂuid [19]. For the
temperature-dependent ﬂuid properties’ formulas, the coeﬃcients are in the appropriate (implied) SI units.
Temperature BC Notation Tin Tout
Case 1: migration with thermal gradient ΔT >0 323K 293K
Case 2: migration against thermal gradient ΔT <0 293K 323K
Table 5
Temperature boundary conditions for the inner (‘in’) and outer (‘out’) cylinders of the Couette cell.
dependenceof Cp,p,kp, andp forBNshowthatitisquiteweakoverthetemperatureranges( ≈200 –400K )explored
in this work [20, 54, 56].
In these simulations, we use BN particles withdp = 675µm at an initial (spatially uniform) volume fraction of
b =0.5, unless otherwise stated. The inner cylinder is rotated so as to maintaiṅ=3s −1 at steady state. The outer
cylinderisheldstationary. Consequently,duetotheshearing,particlesareexpectedtomigratefromtheinnercylinder
towards the outer one. We consider two diﬀerent sets of thermal BCs as described in Table 5. In doing so, we wish
to characterize the radial particle migration ﬁelds when the shear-induced particle migration and heat transfer are in
same (ΔT >0) vs. opposite (ΔT <0) directions across the gap.
Having speciﬁed the ﬂow conditions, we can now justify why viscous dissipation is neglected in the energy equa-
tions (Eqs. (9) and (10)). Speciﬁcally, the Eckert number for this ﬂow isEc =U2
c∕(CpΔT)≃10 −11, indicating that
conductionisthedominantheattransfermechanisminthissystem. Here,wehavetakenthecharacteristicvelocity Uc
tobetheinnerwallvelocity(correspondingtothe 3s−1 shearrate),and Cp=bCp,p+(1− b)Cp,f isthesuspension’s
speciﬁc heat estimated as the bulk-volume-fraction weighted average at the initial temperature of293K .
5.1.1. Interplay between heat transfer and shear migration
The impact of the direction of the temperature gradient across the Couette cell on the radial particle migration
proﬁles at diﬀerent bulk volume fractions (b = 0.1 tob = 0.5) is shown in Fig. 5. ForΔT <0, the thermal and
sheargradientsleadtomigrationﬂuxesinthesamedirectionand,hence,enhancemigration(incomparisonto ΔT >0,
forwhichtheﬂuxesareinoppositedirections). Therefore,ateach b,weobserveparticlemigrationtowardstheouter
wall (segregation of the mixture). From Fig. 5, we also observe that the particle distribution proﬁles are similar for
bothΔT >0andΔT <0forsmall b,whileaprominentdiﬀerenceemergesas b increases. Therefore,theinterplay
between shear and thermal gradients is more pronounced for dense suspensions.
To fully explore the possible behaviors, we next analyze the impact of thermal Péclet numberPeth on the particle
migration. We varyPeth by changing eitheṙordp: we performed simulations withdp = 0.5−1 .5mm (Fig. 6a)
̇=1−8s −1(Fig.6b),forboth ΔT >0andΔT <0. ForboththetemperatureBCs,particlemigrationissuppressedat
largerdpand ̇(⇒largerPeth). Moreover,ΔT >0resultsinamorehomogeneoussuspensionbecausethecontribution
ofthethermalgradientstothemigrationﬂuxopposesthatofthesheargradients. Signiﬁcantparticlesegregationacross
the gap is observed forΔT <0 because the ﬂuxes due to thermal and shear gradients enhance each other, which aids
particle migration. WhenΔT >0, almost no particle migration is observed for the strongly sheared suspensions with
largestPeth (corresponding to,e.g.,dp=0.5mm and ̇=8s −1).
5.1.2. How the thermo-rheological ﬂuxes aﬀect particle migration
InSection3.3,weprovidedanabstractdiscussionontheoriginofthethermo-rheologicalparticlemigrationﬂuxes
withintheTFMframework. Inthissubsection,wequantifytheeﬀectoftemperaturegradientsontheparticlemigration
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 11 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
Figure 5: Eﬀect of bulk particle volume fractionb on the radial distribution of particles for the concentric Couette cell
fordp=675 µm and ̇=3 s−1. Arrows indicate the direction of increasingb.
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0.68
0.7
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78
(a)
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0.7
0.72
0.74
0.76
0.78 (b)
Figure 6: Eﬀect of varying the thermal Péclet numberPeth = ̇d2
p∕p via (a) the particle diameterdp and (b) the imposed
shear rate ̇(by rotation of the inner cylinder) on the radial distribution of particles in the concentric Couette cell for
b=0.5. Arrows indicate the direction of increasingdp or ̇.
proﬁles for a ﬁxed shear gradient. We now subject the Couette cell toðΔTð = 5−30K for each temperature BC.
Figure 7 shows that, for the BC withΔT >0, as the temperature diﬀerence increases, particle migration is reduced
due to the opposing shear- and thermal-driven particle migration ﬂuxes. The black dashed curve in Fig. 7 represents
the isothermal case in which the migration is solely due to the shear gradient. For BC with opposing heat transfer
(ΔT <0), the contribution of the thermal-gradient-induced particle ﬂux aids the shear-gradient-induced one, leading
to enhanced particle migration towards the outer wall. AsðΔTð is increased (in thisΔT <0 case), the augmentation
from the thermal gradients on the overall migration ﬂux is evidently stronger as well.
5.2. Eccentric Couette cell
FortheconcentricCouettecell,theheattransfercharacteristicsaredominatedbythesuspension’seﬀectivethermal
conductivity, showing only weak dependence on the various parameters varied, which is why we did not discuss this
pointinSection5.1. Amoreinterestingsetupinwhichtocharacterizetheoverallsystem’sthermalperformanceisthe
dense suspension ﬂow in an eccentric Couette cell (recall Section 4.2). For example, eccentric Couette cells are an
eﬀectivewaytoenhancemixingatlowReynoldsnumber[58]duetotheaddedcomplexityoftherecirculatingregions.
We quantify the system’s heat transfer by calculating the heat transfer coeﬃcientℎin=q¨¨∕(Tin−Tout), whereq¨¨
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 12 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0.7
0.71
0.72
0.73
0.74
0.75
0.76
0.77
Figure 7: Eﬀect of the temperature diﬀerenceΔT across the gap on the radial distribution of particles in the concentric
Couette cell forb=0.5, ̇=3 s−1 and dp=675 µm. Arrows indicate the direction of increasingðΔTð. The black dashed
curve represents the isothermal case (ΔT =0 ).
istheheat ﬂuxfromtheinner cylinder. Note thatthisconvectioncoeﬃcient ℎin, characterizingtheheat transferinthe
entire system, is not the same as inter-phase heat transfer coeﬃcientKℎ from Eq. (11), which captures heat transfer
between the particles and ﬂuid phases. Then, makingℎ dimensionless, we calculate the Nusselt numberNu of the
system. In this section, we show the dependence ofNu on the eccentricityE=d∕(Rout−Rin) of the Couette cell.
We use the basic Couette cell geometry from Section 4.2 with varying eccentricities fromE = 0to0.6 (above
which we observe jamming of particles). The eccentricity in the geometry renders the mesh non-orthogonal. Hence,
additional non-orthogonality correction loops are run in each time step in order to obtain accurate results [41]. We
focus on the neutrally buoyant suspension of BN particles withdp = 675 µm and b = 0.3 in an FC ﬂuid. The
thermophysical properties of the two phases are given in Table 4, as before. Finally, the same sets of thermal BCs as
given in Table 5 are simulated to highlight the diﬀerences between the case when the thermal gradient across the gap
aides or opposes the shear-induced particle migration.
As mentioned above, our ﬁgure of merit for quantifying heat transfer is the system’s Nusselt numberNu. It is
calculated by applying an energy balance at the surface of the hotter cylinder. For the case 1 BC, at steady state, this
energy balance on the inner cylinder wall gives
q¨¨ðr=Rin =−
4
kp
dTp
dr +kf(1− )
dTf
dr
5
r=Rin
=ℎin(Tin−Tout). (19)
The second equality above is used to calculate the heat transfer coeﬃcientℎin=ℎðr=Rin for the case 1 BC. Similarly,
ℎout =ℎðr=Rout for case 2 BC is calculated by applying the same energy balance now at the stationary outer cylinder
(r=Rout). For comparison purposes,ℎin is also calculated for the case 2 BC fromℎout via the steady energy balance
asℎinRin=ℎoutRout. InEq.(19),theparticlevolumefractionandtemperaturegradientsatthehotterwallareobtained
from the TFM simulation. Finally,Nu = ℎin(Rout −Rin)∕ksus (deﬁned the same way for all eccentricities), where
the suspension thermal conductivity is taken asksus = bkp+(1− b)kf for the purposes of computingNu. The
Nusselt number is a ‘coarse’ measure of the system heat transfer, thus in our deﬁnition of it, we do not account for
the shear-induced migration explicitly. Furthermore, sincekp ≈500kf ≫ kf,q¨¨ from Eq. (19) is dominated by the
particle heat ﬂux. Hence, the particle phase’s heat ﬂuxes at the inner (forΔT >0) and outer (forΔT <0) cylinders
drive the thermal performance of the system.
Figure 8a shows that the Nusselt number increases with the eccentricity of the cell forΔT > 0 case, while an
optimum atE = 0.4 is observed forΔT <0 case. The Nusselt number for both thermal BCs is comparable up to
E =0.4, after whichΔT >0 performs better thanΔT <0 forE =0.5 andE =0.6. This behavior can be explained
by considering the results shown in Fig. 9. Diﬀerences in the particle migration ﬁelds are observed forE = 0.5 and
E = 0.6 between the two thermal BCs (especially near the outer wall in the wider gap), while the particle migration
ﬁelds forE=0.4 are visually indistinguishable for both BCs.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 13 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
1.8
1.9
2
2.1
(a)
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6
80
100
120
140 (b)
Figure 8: EﬀectofCouettecelleccentricity E on(a)Nusseltnumber Nu ofthesuspensionand(b)theNusseltenhancement
factorNusus∕Nufc (with respect to clear FC-43 ﬂuid with no particles) forb=0.3, ̇=3 s−1 and dp=675 µm.
ForE =0.5 andE =0.6 withΔT <0, particle migration is more pronounced than forΔT >0, as evidenced by
the larger variation in the volume fraction along the outer wall. The additional migration forΔT <0 is due to shear
and thermal gradients aiding each other (to increase the overall particle ﬂux). This migration, in turn, decreases the
particle ﬂux term in Eq. (19) (forE = 0.5 andE = 0.6 withΔT <0) and, hence, the Nusselt number is reduced
compared to theΔT >0 case. For this same case, particle migration is also enhanced by the recirculating ﬂow (a
‘vortex’)observedinthevelocityﬁeldsinFig.9. Foreccentricityratio E ≲0.4,therecirculatingﬂowisnotobserved
(consistent withthe knowntheory for aNewtonian eccentricCouette ﬂow [3, Fig.17]), therefore particle migrationis
diminished forE=0.4compared toE=0.5andE=0.6. In addition, the vortex becomes larger and moves towards
the outer wall forΔT <0 (compared toΔT >0). Once again, this observation highlights the interplay between heat
transferandparticlemigration,furthersuggestingthattheﬂowcharacteristicscanalsobetunedinthissystemviasaid
interplay.
Figure 8b shows the dependence of the enhancement factorNusus∕Nufc (with respect to clear FC-43 ﬂuid with
no particles) on the eccentricity ratioE. Even thoughNusus (up toE =0.4 for theΔT <0 case) andNufc are both
augmented at higherE, the enhancement factor decreases withE. This observation suggests that there is a trade-oﬀ
in the eccentric Couette cell ﬂow. The suspension yields the largest enhancement (compared to the clear FC ﬂuid) for
theconcentriccase( E=0 ). Therelativeimprovementisreducedthereafter,althoughitisstillsigniﬁcant. Thereason
for the diminished improvement with increasingE is that the suspension entrains particles near the outer wall in the
widergapsection(asevidentfromthetoprowofFig.9),whereastheclearFCﬂuidﬂow(havingnoparticles)doesnot
exhibitthispathology. Therefore, Nusus∕Nufc showsamilddecreasingtrendwith E,astheaccumulationofparticles
near the outer wall cancels out some of the heat transfer enhancement enabled by the highly-conductive BN particles.
Considerable deviation between the two BCs is observed atE = 0.5 andE = 0.6 due to the enhanced particle
migration for the case 2 BC resulting in lowerNusus and hence lowerNusus∕Nufc.
6. Conclusion
Inthepresentwork,wedevelopedatwo-ﬂuidmodel(TFM)forsimulationofheattransferindensenon-Brownian
suspensions. We used this TFM to investigate the eﬀect of combined shear and thermal gradients on the phenomenon
of particle migration in a Couette cell. We built upon our previous work, Municchi et al. [41], in which we focused
only on the anisotropy stress tensor (recall Eq. (8)) and the shear-induced particle migration aspect. In this work, we
extendedthelatterbycalibratingaclosurerelationfortheinter-phaseheattransfercoeﬃcient,giveninEq.(11),which
takes into account the joint eﬀect of the particle thermal diﬀusivity and rate-of-strain tensor of the particulate phase
on the inter-phase (ﬂuid-particle) heat transfer. In this respect, unlike previous models, the proposed TFM allows for
thermaldisequilibriumbetweenthephases. Speciﬁcally,intheTFM,shearingthesuspensionenhancestheinter-phase
heattransfercoeﬃcient,ratherthantheintrinsicthermalconductivityofparticles(asinpreviousmodels),whichshould
be a ﬁxed thermophysical quantity. This approach allowed us to explain the origin of a novel thermo-rheological ﬂux
and its eﬀect on the particle migration phenomenon. Speciﬁcally, Eq. (15) shows that a ﬂux due to thermal gradients
can act to oppose a ﬂux generated by shear gradients.
Tofurtherunderstandtheinterplayofshearandthermalgradientsonparticlemigration,weconductedaparametric
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 14 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
𝐸=0.4 𝐸=0.5 𝐸=0.6
Δ𝑇>0 Δ𝑇<0 Δ𝑇>0 Δ𝑇<0 Δ𝑇>0 Δ𝑇<0
Volume fraction Temperature (K)Velocity (m/s)
Figure 9: Comparison of the volume fraction, suspension temperature ﬁeld, and suspension velocity (visualized by stream-
lines color-coded by the velocity magnitude) for diﬀerentE in the eccentric Couette cell ﬂow, considering both types of
thermal BCs.
study of dense suspension ﬂow in a Couette cell by varyingb,Peth (by varyinġanddp) andΔT across the gap.
An enhanced particle segregation is seen whenΔT <0 because the signs of the shear and thermal gradients term in
Eq. (15) are the same (ﬂuxes are in the same direction). On the other hand, forΔT >0, the ﬂuxes due to shear and
thermalgradientsopposeeachotherresultinginahomogeneousparticledistributionacrossthegap. Thediﬀerencein
particle migration proﬁles between the two cases increase as the suspension is made denser. This observation follows
from the fact that the eﬀect of individual migration ﬂux terms is more pronounced when more particles (by volume)
are added to the system. In addition, we observed that particle migration is reduced for both thermal BCs in strongly
sheared suspensions (larger thermal Péclet number).
Moreover, for theΔT >0 case, asðΔTð across the gap is increased, the opposing thermal-gradient-induced ﬂux
strengthens, and ultimately cancels out more of the shear-gradient-induced ﬂux. The result is a more homogeneous
suspension across the gap. Therefore, from a practical point of view, to reduce particle migration and improve the
thermalperformanceofthisﬂowsystem,itisrecommendedthattheCouettecellisdenselyﬁlled(say, b=0.5)with
large particles (say,dp=0.5mm) and subjected to high shear rates (say,̇=8s −1) with heat transfer in the direction
towards the outer wall (ΔT >0).
Finally, we investigated the eﬀect of eccentricity of the Couette cell on the overall heat transfer characteristics.
The eccentricity was varied fromE = 0to E = 0.6 above which jamming of particles (ﬂow arrest) occurs. We
observed an increase in the Nusselt numberNu withE for theΔT >0 BC, while an optimum atE = 0.4 exists for
theΔT <0 BC. Decrease inNu at largerE (for theΔT <0 case) is due to enhanced particle migration arising from
the combined eﬀect of shear- and thermal-induced particle migration aiding each other and a large recirculation zone
resulting in a diminished particle ﬂux, hence diminished heat transfer across the system. In addition, the heat transfer
enhancement factor (Nusus∕Nufc) is maximum for a concentric Couette cell. Even thoughNusus andNufc increase
with eccentricity, their ratio decreases because particles are entrained near the outer wall for the suspension ﬂow at
largeE, whereas they are not present in clear FC-43 ﬂuid, and reduce the overall enhancement brought by the high
particle conductivity.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 15 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
Ultimately,Fig.8ashowsthattherangeof Nu isquitenarrowforthetemperatureBCsunderconsiderationbecause
heat transfer in the system is dictated by the overall properties of the suspension, as also shown in previous studies
[8, 32]. The main take-away from in this study that we wish to highlight to the reader is the novel eﬀect of the
temperaturediﬀerencedirectionalityontheenhancementordiminutionofparticlemigration,arisingfromthethermo-
rheological migration ﬂuxes (Section 3.3). This eﬀect is most clearly observed by contrasting the curves in Fig. 6 for
the two BCs. In future work, it would be of interest to experimentally interrogate this phenomenon.
In future work, it would be of interest to also explore engineering applications of the TFM for computational
modeling of heat transfer in dense suspensions, along the lines of our preliminary study of electronics cooling via
microchannels [42].
Acknowledgements
Acknowledgment is made to the donors of the American Chemical Society Petroleum Research Fund for partial
supportofthisresearchunderACSPRFaward#57371-DNI9,inparticularforsupportingP.P.N.andI.C.C.duringthe
initial development of the dense suspension TFM and thetwoFluidsNBSuspensionFoam solver [40]. A.M.M. and
I.C.C. are also aﬃliated with the Center for Particulate Products and Processes (CP3) at Purdue University.
CRediT authorship contribution statement
Pranay P. Nagrani:Formal analysis, Validation, Data Curation, Visualization, Writing.Federico Municchi:
Software, Methodology, Formal analysis, Supervision, Writing.Amy M. Marconnet:Conceptualization, Method-
ology, Project administration, Supervision, Writing.Ivan C. Christov:Conceptualization, Methodology, Funding
acquisition, Formal analysis, Project administration, Supervision, Writing.
References
[1] Ahuja,A.S.,1975a. Augmentationofheattransportinlaminarﬂowofpolystyrenesuspensions.I.Experimentsandresults. JournalofApplied
Physics 46, 3408–3416. doi:10.1063/1.322107.
[2] Ahuja, A.S., 1975b. Augmentation of heat transport in laminar ﬂow of polystyrene suspensions. II. Analysis of the data. Journal of Applied
Physics 46, 3417–3425. doi:10.1063/1.322062.
[3] Ballal, B.Y., Rivlin, R.S., 1976. Flow of a Newtonian ﬂuid between eccentric rotating cylinders: Inertial eﬀects. Archive for Rational
Mechanics and Analysis 62, 237–294. doi:10.1007/BF00280016.
[4] Barbati, A.C., Desroches, J., Robisson, A., McKinley, G.H., 2016. Complex Fluids and Hydraulic Fracturing. Annual Review of Chemical
and Biomolecular Engineering 7, 415–453. doi:10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-080615-033630.
[5] Buyevich, Y., 1996. Particle distribution in suspension shear ﬂow. Chemical Engineering Science 51, 635–647. doi: 10.1016/
0009-2509(95)00243-X.
[6] Chen, X., Louge, M., 2008. Heat transfer enhancement in dense suspensions of agitated solids. Part I: Theory. International Journal of Heat
and Mass Transfer 51, 5108–5118. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2008.04.059.
[7] Colangelo, G., Favale, E., Milanese, M., de Risi, A., Laforgia, D., 2017. Cooling of electronic devices: Nanoﬂuids contribution. Applied
Thermal Engineering 127, 421–435. doi:10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2017.08.042.
[8] Dbouk, T., 2018. Heat transfer and shear-induced migration in dense non-Brownian suspension ﬂows: modelling and simulation. Journal of
Fluid Mechanics 840, 432–454. doi:10.1017/jfm.2018.72.
[9] Dbouk, T., 2019. A new technology for CPU chip cooling by concentrated suspension ﬂow of non-colloidal particles. Applied Thermal
Engineering 146, 664–673. doi:10.1016/j.applthermaleng.2018.10.044.
[10] Dbouk, T., Bahrani, S.A., 2021. Modeling of buoyancy-driven thermal convection in immersed granular beds. International Journal of
Multiphase Flow 134, 103471. doi:10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2020.103471.
[11] Dbouk, T., Lemaire, E., Lobry, L., Moukalled, F., 2013a. Shear-induced particle migration: Predictions from experimental evaluation of the
particle stress tensor. Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 198, 78–95. doi:10.1016/j.jnnfm.2013.03.006.
[12] Dbouk, T., Lobry, L., Lemaire, E., 2013b. Normal stresses in concentrated non-Brownian suspensions. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 715,
239–272. doi:10.1017/jfm.2012.516.
[13] Denn, M.M., Morris, J.F., 2014. Rheology of Non-Brownian Suspensions. Annual Review of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering 5,
203–228. doi:10.1146/annurev-chembioeng-060713-040221.
[14] DiCarlo,D.,Irimia,D.,Tompkins,R.G.,Toner,M.,2007.Continuousinertialfocusing,ordering,andseparationofparticlesinmicrochannels.
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, 18892–18897. doi:10.1073/pnas.0704958104.
[15] Di Felice, R., 1995. Hydrodynamics of liquid ﬂuidisation. Chemical Engineering Science 50, 1213–1245. doi:10.1016/0009-2509(95)
98838-6.
[16] van Dinther, A., Schroën, C., Vergeldt, F., van der Sman, R., Boom, R., 2012. Suspension ﬂow in microﬂuidic devices — A review of
experimental techniques focussing on concentration and velocity gradients. Advances in Colloid and Interface Science 173, 23–34. doi:10.
1016/j.cis.2012.02.003.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 16 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
[17] Dontsov, E.V., Boronin, S.A., Osiptsov, A.A., Derbyshev, D.Y., 2019. Lubrication model of suspension ﬂow in a hydraulic fracture with
frictional rheology for shear-induced migration and jamming. Proceedings of the Royal Society A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering
Sciences 475, 20190039. doi:10.1098/rspa.2019.0039.
[18] Drew, D.A., Passman, P.L., 1999. Theory of Multicomponent Fluids. volume 135 ofApplied Mathematical Sciences. Springer-Verlag, New
York, NY. doi:10.1007/b97678.
[19] Electronics Materials Solutions Division, 2020. 3M ™ Fluorinert™ Electronic Liquid FC-43. Technical Report.
Electronics Materials Solutions Division. St. Paul, MN. URL: https://multimedia.3m.com/mws/media/64889O/
3m-novec-fluorinert-electronic-liquid-fc43.pdf .
[20] Gavrichev,K.S.,Solozhenko,V.L.,Gorbunov,V.E.,Golushina,L.N.,Totrova,G.A.,Lazarev,V.B.,1993. Low-temperatureheatcapacityand
thermodynamic properties of four boron nitride modiﬁcations. Thermochimica Acta 217, 77–89. doi:10.1016/0040-6031(93)85099-U.
[21] Gidaspow, D., 1986. Hydrodynamics of Fiuidizatlon and Heat Transfer: Supercomputer Modeling. Applied Mechanics Reviews 39, 1–23.
doi:10.1115/1.3143702.
[22] Guazzelli, E., Morris, J.F., 2011. A Physical Introduction to Suspension Dynamics. volume 45 ofCambridge Texts in Applied Mathematics.
Cambridge University Press, New York. doi:10.1017/CBO9780511894671.
[23] Gunn, D.J., 1978. Transfer of heat or mass to particles in ﬁxed and ﬂuidised beds. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 21,
467–476. doi:10.1016/0017-9310(78)90080-7.
[24] Kang, C., Yoshikawa, H.N., Mirbod, P., 2021. Onset of thermal convection in non-colloidal suspensions. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 915,
A128. doi:10.1017/jfm.2021.59.
[25] Kuipers, J.A.M., van Duin, K.J., van Beckum, F.P.H., van Swaaij, W.P.M., 1993. Computer simulation of the hydrodynamics of a two-
dimensional gas-ﬂuidized bed. Computers & Chemical Engineering 17, 839–858. doi:10.1016/0098-1354(93)80067-W.
[26] Lareo, C., Fryer, P., Barigou, M., 1997. The Fluid Mechanics of Two-Phase Solid-Liquid Food Flows: A Review. Food and Bioproducts
Processing 75, 73–105. doi:10.1205/096030897531405.
[27] Leighton, D., Acrivos, A., 1987. Measurement of shear induced self diﬀusion in concentrated suspensions of spheres. Journal of Fluid
Mechanics 177, 109–131. doi:10.1017/S0022112087000880.
[28] Lhuillier, D., 2009. Migration of rigid particles in non-Brownian viscous suspensions. Physics of Fluids 21, 023302. doi:10.1063/1.
3079672.
[29] Lin, S.X.Q., Chen, X.D., Chen, Z.D., Bandopadhayay, P., 2003. Shear rate dependent thermal conductivity measurement of two fruit juice
concentrates. Journal of Food Engineering 57, 217–224. doi:10.1016/S0260-8774(02)00300-X.
[30] Maron, S.H., Pierce, P.E., 1956. Application of Ree-Eyring generalized ﬂow theory to suspensions of spherical particles. Journal of Colloid
Science 11, 80–95. doi:10.1016/0095-8522(56)90023-X.
[31] Metzger, B., Butler, J.E., 2010. Irreversibility and chaos: Role of long-range hydrodynamic interactions in sheared suspensions. Physical
Review E 82, 051406. doi:10.1103/PhysRevE.82.051406.
[32] Metzger,B.,Rahli,O.,Yin,X.,2013. Heattransferacrossshearedsuspensions: roleoftheshear-induceddiﬀusion. JournalofFluidMechanics
724, 527–552. doi:10.1017/jfm.2013.173.
[33] Miller, R.M., Morris, J.F., 2006. Normal stress-driven migration and axial development in pressure-driven ﬂow of concentrated suspensions.
Journal of Non-Newtonian Fluid Mechanics 135, 149–165. doi:10.1016/j.jnnfm.2005.11.009.
[34] Miller,R.M.,Singh,J.P.,Morris,J.F.,2009. Suspensionﬂowmodelingforgeneralgeometries. ChemicalEngineeringScience64,4597–4610.
doi:10.1016/j.ces.2009.04.033.
[35] Mills, P., Snabre, P., 1995. Rheology and Structure of Concentrated Suspensions of Hard Spheres. Shear Induced Particle Migration. Journal
de Physique II 5, 1597–1608. doi:10.1051/jp2:1995201.
[36] Mirbod, P., 2016. Two-dimensional computational ﬂuid dynamical investigation of particle migration in rotating eccentric cylinders using
suspension balance model. International Journal of Multiphase Flow 80, 79–88. doi:10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2015.11.002.
[37] Morris,J.F.,2020. Towardaﬂuidmechanicsofsuspensions. PhysicalReviewFluids5,110519. doi: 10.1103/PhysRevFluids.5.110519.
[38] Morris,J.F.,Boulay,F.,1999. Curvilinearﬂowsofnoncolloidalsuspensions: Theroleofnormalstresses. JournalofRheology43,1213–1237.
doi:10.1122/1.551021.
[39] Moukalled, F., Mangani, L., Darwish, M., 2016. The Finite Volume Method in Computational Fluid Dynamics: An Advanced Introduction
with OpenFOAM® and Matlab. volume 113 ofFluid Mechanics and Its Applications. Springer International Publishing, Cham. doi:10.
1007/978-3-319-16874-6 .
[40] Municchi, F., 2019. twoFluidsNBSuspensionFoam. doi:10.5281/zenodo.3558677.
[41] Municchi, F., Nagrani, P.P., Christov, I.C., 2019. A two-ﬂuid model for numerical simulation of shear-dominated suspension ﬂows. Interna-
tional Journal of Multiphase Flow 120, 103079. doi:10.1016/j.ijmultiphaseflow.2019.07.015.
[42] Nagrani,P.P.,Christov,I.C.,Marconnet,A.M.,2021. Two-FluidModelingofDenseParticulateSuspensionsforElectronicsCooling,in: 2021
20th IEEE Intersociety Conference on Thermal and Thermomechanical Phenomena in Electronic Systems (iTherm), IEEE, San Diego, CA.
pp. 1190–1197. doi:10.1109/ITherm51669.2021.9503267.
[43] NiaziArdekani,M.,Asmar,L.A.,Picano,F.,Brandt,L.,2018. Numericalstudyofheattransferinlaminarandturbulentpipeﬂowwithﬁnite-
size spherical particles. International Journal of Heat and Fluid Flow 71, 189–199. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatfluidflow.2018.04.002.
[44] Nott,P.R.,Brady,J.F.,1994. Pressure-drivenﬂowofsuspensions: simulationandtheory. JournalofFluidMechanics275,157–199. doi: 10.
1017/S0022112094002326.
[45] Nott, P.R., Guazzelli, E., Pouliquen, O., 2011. The suspension balance model revisited. Physics of Fluids 23, 043304. doi:10.1063/1.
3570921.
[46] Panton, R.L., 2013. Incompressible Flow. 4th ed., John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA. doi:10.1002/9781118713075.
[47] Passalacqua, A., Fox, R.O., 2011. Implementation of an iterative solution procedure for multi-ﬂuid gas–particle ﬂow models on unstructured
grids. Powder Technology 213, 174–187. doi:10.1016/j.powtec.2011.07.030.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 17 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
[48] Phillips, R.J., Armstrong, R.C., Brown, R.A., Graham, A.L., Abbott, J.R., 1992. A constitutive equation for concentrated suspensions that
accounts for shear-induced particle migration. Physics of Fluids A: Fluid Dynamics 4, 30–40. doi:10.1063/1.858498.
[49] Pine, D.J., Gollub, J.P., Brady, J.F., Leshansky, A.M., 2005. Chaos and threshold for irreversibility in sheared suspensions. Nature 438,
997–1000. doi:10.1038/nature04380.
[50] Ranz, W.E., Marshall, W.R., 1952. Evaporation from drops. Part I. Chemical Engineering Progress 48, 141–146.
[51] Segré, G., Silberberg, A., 1961. Radial Particle Displacements in Poiseuille Flow of Suspensions. Nature 189, 209–210. doi:10.1038/
189209a0.
[52] Shin, S., Lee, S.H., 2000. Thermal conductivity of suspensions in shear ﬂow ﬁelds. International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 43,
4275–4284. doi:10.1016/S0017-9310(00)00050-8.
[53] Shiozawa, S., McClure, M., 2016. Simulation of proppant transport with gravitational settling and fracture closure in a three-dimensional
hydraulic fracturing simulator. Journal of Petroleum Science and Engineering 138, 298–314. doi:10.1016/j.petrol.2016.01.002.
[54] Shipilo, V.B., Guseva, I.P., Leushkina, G.V., Makovetskaya, L.A., Popel’nyuk, G.P., 1986. Electrical and thermal conductivity of beta-BN.
Inorganic Materials 22, 361–365.
[55] Sohn, C.W., Chen, M.M., 1981. Microconvective Thermal Conductivity in Disperse Two-Phase Mixtures as Observed in a Low Velocity
Couette Flow Experiment. Journal of Heat Transfer 103, 47–51. doi:10.1115/1.3244428.
[56] Solozhenko, V.L., Peun, T., 1997. Compression and thermal expansion of hexagonal graphite-like boron nitride up to 7 GPa and 1800 K.
Journal of Physics and Chemistry of Solids 58, 1321–1323. doi:10.1016/S0022-3697(97)00037-1.
[57] Subia, S.R., Ingber, M.S., Mondy, L.A., Altobelli, S.A., Graham, A.L., 1998. Modelling of concentrated suspensions using a continuum
constitutive equation. Journal of Fluid Mechanics 373, 193–219. doi:10.1017/S0022112098002651.
[58] Swanson,P.D.,Ottino,J.M.,1990. Acomparativecomputationalandexperimentalstudyofchaoticmixingofviscousﬂuids. JournalofFluid
Mechanics 213, 227–249. doi:10.1017/S0022112090002300.
[59] Wang, J., 2020. Continuum theory for dense gas-solid ﬂow: A state-of-the-art review. Chemical Engineering Science 215, 115428. doi:10.
1016/j.ces.2019.115428.
[60] Wang, L., Koch, D.L., Yin, X., Cohen, C., 2009. Hydrodynamic diﬀusion and mass transfer across a sheared suspension of neutrally buoyant
spheres. Physics of Fluids 21, 033303. doi:10.1063/1.3098446.
[61] Wu,W.T.,Aubry,N.,Antaki,J.,McKoy,M.,Massoudi,M.,2017a. HeatTransferinaDrillingFluidwithGeothermalApplications. Energies
10, 1349. doi:10.3390/en10091349.
[62] Wu, W.T., Massoudi, M., 2016. Heat Transfer and Dissipation Eﬀects in the Flow of a Drilling Fluid. Fluids 1, 4. doi:10.3390/
fluids1010004.
[63] Wu, W.T., Zhou, Z.F., Aubry, N., Antaki, J.F., Massoudi, M., 2017b. Heat transfer and ﬂow of a dense suspension between two cylinders.
International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer 112, 597–606. doi:10.1016/j.ijheatmasstransfer.2017.05.017.
[64] Zydney, A.L., Colton, C.K., 1988. Augmented solute transport in the shear ﬂow of a concentrated suspension. PCH. Physicochemical
Hydrodynamics 10, 77–96.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 18 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0.25 0.5 1 2
m
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.7
1
-
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
-0.1
0
log10RMSE
Figure 10: Root mean squared error (RMSE) map between the transient temperature proﬁles of the heat-pulse experiment
[32] and the TFM simulations, computed for a range of parameter values∈[0.1,1.0] andm∈[0.25,2] used in the closure
forKℎ from Eq.(11).
A. Calibration of the parameters inKℎ for non-zero shear rate
Calibration of the closure relation in Eq. (11) is required to simulate coupled thermal-ﬂuid suspension ﬂows at
non-zero shear rates. Speciﬁcally, the parameters andm introduced inKℎ must be chosen to ensure that the simu-
lated transient temperature decay proﬁle at the inner cylinder wall matches that of the heat pulse experiment (recall
Section 4.1). We considered ∈ [0.1,1.0] andm ∈ [0.25,2] and calculated the root-mean-squared error (RMSE)
between the TFM simulations and the experimental data as
RMSE=
yxxw1
n
nÉ
i=1
 TTFM,i−Texpt,i
2, (20)
wherenistotalnumberoftimepointssampled. Here, TTFM,iisthetemperaturedatageneratedfromtheTFMsimulation
by interpolating the transient temperature proﬁle at the same time-pointsti as the experimental measurementTexpt,i
(recall Fig. 3). As shown by the cross symbol in Fig. 10, the RMSE is least for ≈0.2 andm≈1 . Therefore, these
are the parameter values used for the simulations in the main text.
B. Calibration at zero shear rate: Lumped-parameter modeling of the cylinder
Althoughnotrelevanttoourstudyfor shear-inducedmigration,forcompleteness,herewediscusshowthe noshear
(̇= 0s−1) curve is calibrated in Fig. 3. The inner and outer cylinders are held stationary for the entire simulation
(during both the heating and cooling periods). For thermal BCs, although the outer wall is maintained at293K in the
experiments, thegapissuﬃcientlylargethatwemodeltheouterthermalBCaswellinsulated. Fortheinnercylinder,
duringthe 5s ofheating,weassumeaconstantwalltemperatureof 298K,whichneglectsthetimeittakesfortheinner
cylindertoheatup. Forcooling,employingtheideafrom[32,Section2.2.2]usedtoestimatethethermaldiﬀusivityof
the suspension, we develop a modiﬁed time-decaying temperature gradient BC (for our simulations) at the inner wall.
Speciﬁcally, consider the energy balance at the inner wall. Then, assuming a lumped capacitance model for the
cylinder itself:
McylCP
dTwall
dt =−2RinL
4
kp
dTp
dr +kf(1− )
dTf
dr
5
r=Rin
, (21)
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 19 of 20

Two-ﬂuid modeling of heat transfer in ﬂows of dense suspensions
0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0.73
0.74
0.75
Figure 11: Mesh independent study for the concentric Couette cell. Here,Ncells is the number of mesh cells in the radial
direction across the gap. The grid arrangement is shown in Fig. 2.
whereTwall is the inner cylinder wall temperature,Mcyl,CP andL are the mass, speciﬁc heat and length of the inner
cylinder, respectively. To ﬁnd the functional form ofdTwall∕dt to use in Eq. (21) to obtain the sought after BC for
simulations, we ﬁt an exponential decayTwall(t)− Tinitial =(Tmax−Tinitial)exp(−At) to the measuredTwall(t) in [32]
(for the case of no shear), recalling thatTinitial = 293K andTmax = 298K. We obtainedA ≈ 0.0129s −1. Finding
the expression fordTwall∕dt from this equation and substituting it into Eq. (21), we solve for the radial temperature
gradient at the inner wall, and obtain the following BC:
4

dTp
dr +(1− )
dTf
dr
5
r=Rin
«­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­¯­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­­¬
from simulation
=BAexp(−At)
«­­­­­¯­­­­­¬
from experiment
. (22)
In this case,k = kp = kf, and hence it is included inB = McylCp(Tmax −Tinitial)∕(2RinLk), which lumps
together all the unknown (unmeasured) inner cylinder physical quantities in this problem. Because there is no shear
in this example, Eq. (11) reduces toKℎ = Kℎ,0, which is obtained from the particle-based Ranz–Marshall Nusselt
correlation. Thus, the only unknown in our model isB in Eq. (22), which is a constant that lumps together all the
unknown inner cylinder properties. To ﬁnd a suitable value forB, we performed TFM simulations, using Eq. (22) as
theimposedBC,andmatchedthetemperaturedecayproﬁlepredictedbytheTFMtotheexperimentallymeasuredone
in [32], to obtainB≈10 5Ksm −1 (this is the simulation shown in Fig. 3).
C. Mesh Independence Study
In this appendix, we justify the mesh used to produce the simulation results in the main text. To be able to trust
our conclusions, we must verify the simulations are independent of the mesh resolution (in addition to the calibra-
tion/validation against experiments performed in Sections 4.1 and 4.2). We consider the concentric Couette cell ge-
ometry (Fig. 2) ﬁlled withdp = 675µm BN particles suspended atb = 50%in FC-43 ﬂuid (refer to Table 4 for
the remaining properties). A temperature diﬀerence ofΔT = 30K is set across the Couette cell, in which the inner
cylinderisrotatedatashearrateof ̇=3s −1. AsseenfromFig.11, Ncells=120 alongtheradialdirectionaccurately
captures the particle volume fraction distribution, providing us with the computationally “optimal” mesh resolution.
P. P. Nagraniet al.: Preprint submitted to Elsevier Page 20 of 20